---
layout: post
title: Pareto snakes and Markov ladders
date: 2025-05-05 16:28:00
description: Flickering noise from Markovian dynamics.
tags: flickering noise
categories: scientific
thumbnail: assets/img/5.jpg
---

<p>A question that has been on my mind for a while now is how Markovian dynamics can give rise to "flickering noise", i.e. a
power spectrum with (a range of) 1/f like behaviour. Below is an example, loosely based on the game of "snakes and ladders".
Let the output signal be 0 when the state is in cluster 0 and 1 if it is in cluster 1. A simple computation shows that the
probability of residence times is algebraic for cluster 0 and exponential for cluster 1. Thus, the spectrum is that of an
alternating fractal renewal process (see Lowen & Teich's <i>Fractal-based point processes</i>). Shown are the averaged results
of 4,000 simulations with 200 "ladders". The truncation of the chain in cluster 0 leads to a truncation of the range
in which flickering noise is observed.</p>
<p>Of course, this example is not very satisfactory because the algebraic decay of the probability distribution is caused
by the hard-coded algebraic decay of the weights coupling the clusters. I have since had better ideas...
<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/6.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/7.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/8.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
<div class="row mt-3">
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/9.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
        </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Left: the "snakes and ladders" Markov chain. Top right: example of a time series with exponentially distributed intervals at value 1 and Pareto distributed intervals at value 0. Bottom right: probability distributions for the residency times in both clusters. Bottom: power spectrum showing "flickering noise". Averaged over 4,000 trials for n=200.
</div>

